+++
date = "2020-01-09"
title = "Achievable Aims"
summary = "Is 2020 off to a flier?"
+++

It's been a super break but I'm ready to go back to work, and tomorrow I start a new job, the first as a software developer -- or is that "software engineer"?

But before tomorrow arrives I'd like to quickly summarise the start of 2020, reviewing the first 12 days.

"New Year's Resolutions" Ever done those? I haven't. Until now. And by design they're all very selfish, just about improving my quality of life. Perhaps in 2022 -- accounting for expected unexpected delays -- a virtuous, selfless list will be revealed.

1. Caffeine: By the end of the year, coffee will only be for social occasions and limited to 5 per week. There will be no changes in other consumption habits to make up for the shortfall.
2. Bedtime Mobile: No mobile to be permitted in the bedroom by the end of the year. Use an alarm clock, not the mobile's alarm clock feature.
3. Cycle to Work: Cycle to and from work at least 3 times per week.
4. Alcohol: No casual beer/wine at home when it's just the usual crowd (housemates).

As for updates on these from the first 12 days:

1. Caffeine: I started this one early, in December, so that by the time I start work tomorrow my body has adjusted to max one coffee per day. It's gone well. 0/1 coffee per day no problem, though I have been drinking more (breakfast/builder's) tea.
2. Bedtime Mobile: I received an alarm clock for Christmas and I'm using it, but I am still taking my mobile into the bedroom even though I have then immediately switched it to flight mode. I'd say this is going well, since I have another 11.5 months to crack the habit.
3. Cycle to Work: Since I'm not yet in a job an update is a bit strange here. That said, I have been out on the bike a lot the past fortnight, making use of having been signed up as a Stuart delivery partner (Stuwie) whilst at Stuart. Last week I spent 10 hours on the Stuart platform and made just over £100, which is ok considering I was working without shifts.
4. Alcohol: This one is going well. I almost cracked the other night as before Christmas I'd signed up for Beer52 to make use of a killer offer (10 craft beers for the cost of the delivery only) and these beers are teasing me in the fridge... I'd played tennis both morning and evening and would have loved a cold one. I resisted.

What about other stuff? Not the resolution bs.

Films?

**Old Release** *Cocktail (1988)* -- Watch it if you haven't! Super film, fantastic soundtrack, Tom Cruise being Tom Cruise without the Mission Impossible stunt stuff. Perfect for a Sunday evening or any other evening or time of day whenever. Versatile.

**New Release** *The Gentlemen (2020)* -- Hugh Grant in a Guy Ritchie? You gotta be kidding me! Works a dream. Rest of the cast, brilliant. Hugely enjoyable, and quotable...

Books?

*Prisoners of Geography (Tim Marshall)* -- Borrowed from my godfather back in September or thenabouts, and he wants it back to have a second read. I can see why. Tim has some humour as he whistles through a tour of geopolitics today (well, originally 2015 but updated for Brexit I think, so late 2016 edition). Very convincing, very fun.

New places?

Out on the bike I've had more of an explore of Queen's Park, Richmond, Camden... Spotting cafes and restaurants to return to -- Minkies Deli by Kensal Rise station is enticing. No exhibitions or stage shows in 2020 yet, but it's early days.

Online learning

Ripping through UC San Diego's *Object Oriented Programming in Java* on Coursera: It's a bit simple. Any recommendations for a course on OOP? Have a few chapters left of the Rust book that I'll get around to, and looking forward to starting EPFL's *Functional Program Design in Scala* that I've been meaning to do for a while now.

Also need to get on with French! Maybe that should be on the resolutions' list?
